The next challenge we're going to
consider is self-fulfilling prophecies.
There are a couple challenges
here mixed together,
but the umbrella idea is
self-fulfilling prophecies.
And I want to motivate it by reminding you
of a movie from 1983, a well-known movie
starring Eddie Murphy as
originally a fraud and
a beggar and a ne'er do well.
And Dan Aykroyd as a successful
pedigreed investment banker.
And if you've seen the movie
you know what happens.
But basically Aykroyd's
character's uncle's have a bet
that they could, if they wanted, turn
the Murphy character into essentially,
the Aykroyd character, and vice versa.
That if they simply treat the Murphy
character different, they could elevate
him from the streets of New York into
a well healed investment banker.
And conversely, if they treated
Dan Aykroyd's character differently.
They would turn him in,
given a little time,
to someone essentially as pitiful
as the Eddie Murphy character.
If you've seen the movie you know that
they pulled this off quite successfully
for a while.
And that's the main point here is that
we have a profound impact on those who
we work around and who work for
us by what we expect of them.
And what the psychologists
have documented over time
is that people respond
to those expectations.
That people tend toward performing
consistent with expectations.
High expectations increase performance.
Low expectations decrease performance.
This occurs for one of two main reasons.
One is that we tend to
treat people differently
when we have high expectations for
them or low expectations.
So we might actually put them
in different situations,
not unlike Dan Aykroyd's character's
Uncles' did in Trading Places.
So this has been studied in teachers
in classrooms where they manipulate
teachers expectations for children and
they observe that even though children
were randomly assigned here that
over time their performance changes.
And they track the mechanism to that
teachers treat them differently,
teachers treat, they give more attention
to those they expect more from,
they give less attention
those expect less from.
They put in short those they have high
expectations for and advantage situations
and the students respond to that and
perform better over time.
Another mechanism by which self fulfilling
prophecies work is that merely having our
expectations voiced can change
the other party's behavior.
So I want to give you
an example from the literature.
A famous example from Snyder et
al in 1977 on stereotypes and
how they exercise influence.
Even if we're not changing
the situation that the person is in.
So this was an experimental procedure and
the cover for
this, the cover story meaning what
the experimenters told the participants.
They were studying initial interactions
that don't include non-verbal.
So they wanted to study
telephone conversations.
Because they wanted to kind of control for
nonverbal's.
They created anonymous male/female
pairings in the first stage.
In the second stage they put these
pairs into a telephone conversation and
they recorded both sides of the telephone
conversation and they recorded them
separately so people can hear just
one side of that if they want to.
The researchers can have
coders hear just one side.
But the people involved in the study
are literally talking to each other
on the telephone.
Each party's side of the conversation was
evaluated by these independent judges.
The judges were unaware of
the hypotheses and the manipulations.
Here's the manipulation,
it's an interesting one, and
it's a little bit sexist but
that's okay because this has been studied
with reversing the roles and
it still goes through.
But at the time what they did was
they distributed a photo of a female,
supposedly the people in the study.
In fact,
it wasn't the people in the study,
these were photos taken from
a different university all together.
And they had created these photos to be
one of two types, either of attractive,
relatively attractive females,
as rated by other parties, and
relatively unattractive females.
So essentially the males in the subject,
half the males are given
an attractive photo and
told that that's who they're talking to.
The other half of the men in the study
were given an unattractive photo and
again told that that is
the person they were talking to.
This is the experimental manipulation,
so you can see what they're doing.
They're changing the expectations
of the men in the study and
what they're going to do is find out how
does that change how the women behave.
So there were no photos
on the female side,
they didn't know that they're
were photos distributed.
All they knew is that they were in this
study that was supposed to be about
interaction.
The initial interactions
that don't have non verbals.
So here's a diagram of what this
looks like just to be clear.
They take the men in the study and
they randomly assign them to one
of two conditions, M1 and M2.
M1 being those who received
attractive female photos.
Again, these aren't the photos
of the actual people.
These are separate people altogether.
And half received unattractive photos.
Women are again randomly assigned to F1 or
F2, no photos involved.
And then they have a phone call.
They then allow people to ask the judges
to go listen these phone calls.
They listen to just one side and
evaluate what happens.
So what they find is that men
in the M1 group, the group
that had received the attractive female
photos, treated the women friendlier.
They literally even though the judges
didn't know the hypothesis,
they didn't even know
the difference in the groups.
They rated the interactions
by the men as friendlier.
It may not be too surprising but
what's surprising and a little profound is
that the raters who were listening to the
female side of the conversation were asked
to judge the attractiveness, the perceived
attractiveness of the woman on the phone.
Again they're just listening
to them on the phone.
But what they found was,
women in F1 were rated as more attractive
than women in F2 only because
they were treated differently.
So see what these researchers
have accomplished.
They have manipulated the expectations
of the men in this study.
As a result the men treat
the women differently.
And the women then act in a way that
is consistent with those expectations,
despite the fact that they didn't
even know what the expectations were.
They were completely
oblivious to what it was.
So in this subtle situation they were able
to document this self-fulfilling prophecy.
This is the kind of thing that we worry
about a great deal in organizations.
This is the kind of thing we worry about
a great deal in performance evaluation and
talent analytics, what impact our
expectations have on employees.
Because people are so hardwired this way.
We're so hardwired to move in
the direction of the expectations people
have for us.
That's the psychologist take.
The sociologist take steps
it up a notch yet and
they had this notion
called The Matthew Effect.
And The Matthew Effect comes from
sociologist Robert Merton in '68.
It's coined from a passage
in the Gospel of Matthew.
But the idea is that the rich get richer,
and the poor get poorer.
And this comes from the accumulation
of early advantages.
The idea is that those who are privileged
early in some way often then have
a step ahead and then those advantages
grow exponentially over time.
We see this in various studies.
You can see it in consumer goods, some
very clever studies on consumer goods.
You can see this in education.
For example, students who are ahead in
reading early, then build on that and
get further ahead in reading as you
go through their early education.
And conversely, students who fall behind
early in their reading have a real
hard time catching up, especially as
they get further and further behind.
And so a little perturbation in
the beginning can accumulate over time.
And we see the same thing with careers.
The idea is that in any setting where
a little experience matters, or
recognition matters, those with early
advantage will increasingly be privileged
over time, that resources accumulate to
those who have these early advantages,
even if those early advantages
might have been randomly assigned.
So in general we have this issue
of self-fulfilling prophecies.
It raises a few questions for us.
It raises a few questions for
you in your organization and in your firm.
Where might your expectations be
affecting other people's behaviors, or
your evaluation of your behavior?
Where are your expectations getting
kind of involved in this process.
We want to find ways to pull your
expectations out of the process.
So what specific steps can you take
to protect the evaluation
processes from these expectations?
Some firms, for example recognizing this,
explicitly name these biases as they sit
down to begin the evaluation processes.
They name it.
They say, here are some biases we know,
in general, people are guilty of.
Let's put them on the table.
Let's be aware of them as we talk
through the next few hours, or
whatever it's going to
be in their evaluations.
And then finally, and this is more
along the lines of the sociologists,
the Matthew Effect, how can you ensure
equal access to valuable resources?
How can you ensure that those who don't
by chance, get an advantage early on,
have that early advantage accumulate
resources that others aren't accumulating?
What can you do to provide equal access?
Otherwise, you're going to be drawing
inferences about skill, talent,
effort based on resources
you see accumulated,
even though it's not because of
underlying skill, talent, or effort,
it's because of the Mathew effect or it's
because of self-fulfilling prophecies.